Okay, let's unpack this. I want you to imagine you're holding a coffee cup, just a regular
ceramic cup in your kitchen. You let it slip from your fingers, it hits the tile floor,
and it shatters into, I don't know, a dozen pieces. Now, standard classical physics tells
us that there is exactly one way that cup was destined to break.
One true outcome, yeah.
Exactly. Like if you knew the exact angle it fell, the microscopic flaws in the ceramic,
the exact humidity in the air, the precise molecular friction of your tile.
Which is impossible to know, obviously.
Right. Impossible for us. But the theory goes that if you could know it, you could calculate
that exact, single, inevitable outcome. But we have a groundbreaking new AI model that
suggests that standard view is, well, it's completely wrong.
It really throws the whole thing out the window.
It does. The universe doesn't have one true, hidden future. It has a multiverse of what
this paper calls admissible continuations. And today, we are going to look at how artificial
intelligence is basically abandoning traditional physics entirely to instead repair broken timelines.
It's a complete inversion of how we think about predicting reality. And the source we're using
for this deep dive is a highly theoretical paper from June, 2026.
Right. By Flyxion.
Yeah, by Flyxion. It's titled Repairing Futures, Admissible Continuation, Historical Reconstruction,
and Diffusion-Based Physical Simulation. And what's fascinating here is that this paper proves
that the way we've been trying to simulate the world, you know, step-by-step, calculating
forces and mass, it's just a dead end.
A total dead end.
We are entering an era where AI treats the future not as a math equation to be solved,
but as a damaged trajectory that needs to be basically mathematically forced back onto
the tracks of reality.
And what's wild is that this isn't just about making, like, better video game physics or
cooler Hollywood CGI. This is a fundamental philosophical shift in how you, the listener,
should view your own reality, your own memory, and your own future.
It really is. It changes everything.
But to understand how we get there, we kind of have to start by completely dismantling the
foundation of classical mechanics. We have to kill something the paper calls the
myth of the complete state.
Right. So if you look at any traditional physics engine or simulation, and I mean,
this goes back to the determinism of Laplace's demon centuries ago, the absolute bedrock assumption
is that a system has a state.
A frozen snapshot, basically.
Exactly. The idea is that if you can take a frozen snapshot of the universe at exactly
time t, and you capture every single relevant detail, you can use the laws of physics to
perfectly calculate time t plus one, the next moment.
It's a very comforting thought. You know, the universe as a giant predictable clockwork
mechanism, you map the gears, you know the time.
It is comforting, but it is mathematically and physically an illusion.
Wow.
In classical mechanics, this is called a Markovian assumption. That's the idea that the next
state only depends on the current state and not on the history of how it got there.
But to have a complete state for even a really mundane system, you need an impossible amount
of information.
So let's put you, the listener, right in the middle of this. Imagine you're programming
a robot arm to pick up that shattered coffee cup we just dropped. In a textbook, you just
input the mass of the cup, the friction of the robot's fingers, the velocity, and boom,
you have a complete state.
Yeah, on paper it works.
But in the real world, you don't actually know any of those things perfectly, do you?
You don't. You need the exact material parameters. You need every single microscopic contact condition
between the robot's grippers and the ceramic.
Which you can't measure.
No. You need precise coefficients of friction. You need the coefficient of restitution, which
is basically how energy is lost or retained when the materials compress against each other.
Right.
You even need the distribution of internal stresses inside the cup from when it was fired in
a kiln years ago.
Wait, seriously?
Yeah, to get a truly complete state. And no measurement procedure on Earth, no combination
of sensors provides all of this. The state you have is always inevitably a partial specification.
You are basically always operating in the dark.
And this is where traditional physics simulators just completely fall apart. Like, when a standard
simulator, let's say the kind that runs crash tests for car companies, faces this gap in
knowledge, it panics.
It doesn't know what to do.
Right. It looks at the missing information about friction or mass, and it labels that gap
as epistemic uncertainty. Which is really just a fancy way of saying, I am ignorant of
the true facts.
Exactly. The old models assume there's still one single true future trajectory for that
coffee cup or that car crash. And because the model is missing the exact friction data, it
just blurs its prediction.
It adds noise. It introduces random Gaussian noise, yeah. It essentially says, well, the
future is a specific sharp line, but my glasses are foggy, so I'll just output a fuzzy cloud
of probability.
But Flyxion completely rejects that. And this is really the first major paradigm shift of
the paper. The paper argues that treating this missing information as noise or ignorance
actually conceals what is happening physically.
It's a fundamental misunderstanding of the physics.
Yeah, because when you run a simulation with partial information, the distribution of different
outcomes you get isn't a measure of your ignorance about one true future. It is a map of possibility.
This is a crucial distinction for you to grasp. It is the difference between tracking ignorance
and tracking physical validity.
Right.
If you don't know the exact microscopic friction of the tile floor, the coffee cup doesn't
just randomly blur into static in real life. It shatters in a multiplicity of perfectly
valid, physically coherent ways.
Because all those ways obey physics.
Exactly. Flyxion calls these admissible continuations. The model shouldn't be trying to guess the one
true future and then just blurring the result when it fails. It should be exploring the entire
manifold of futures that are mathematically consistent with the partial information you
actually gave it.
Okay, let me try to ground this. It's like baking. Say you find an old recipe card, but
a stain is covering the exact oven temperature and the exact amount of flour.
Okay, I like this.
A traditional physics simulator looks at that recipe, panics, and says, error. I cannot compute
the one true cake. Here is a blurry, noisy, abstract average of a cake.
Right, a cloud of flour and sugar.
Yeah. But the real world doesn't throw an error code. If you guess the temperature and
the flour within a reasonable range, you still get a cake. It might be denser, it might be
crispier, but it obeys the laws of chemistry and thermodynamics. It is a physically admissible
cake.
That is a phenomenal way to visualize it. The physical world accepts partial inputs and still
produces coherent outputs. And this brings us to Physiformer, the AI architecture at the heart
of this paper.
This is where it gets crazy.
Yeah, because when the researchers trained this model, they did something that would make
a classical physicist deeply uncomfortable. They intentionally withheld the parameters.
They didn't give it the math.
They did not feed the AI friction coefficients. They did not give it mass distributions or restitution
values.
They went completely into the dark. They just gave it a partial starting geometry and a velocity
and basically said, figure out what happens next.
And traditional theory dictates that the model should fail catastrophically right there.
It lacks the complete state necessary to solve the differential equations of motion.
It doesn't have the recipe.
Right. But Physiformer doesn't fail. It produces incredibly diverse, highly realistic,
physically plausible trajectories. It shows the object bouncing, sliding, and tumbling in a dozen
different ways.
Wow.
Because it isn't trying to calculate a single deterministic path and adding noise when it
gets confused. It is learned to sample directly from the set of all physically valid futures,
that admissible continuation set.
But wait, if we are tossing out the complete state, how does the AI actually know where the
object is going to go? I mean, if you don't have a perfect snapshot of the present, what are
you basing the future on?
That's the million dollar question.
And this is where the paper forces us to rethink time itself, because it argues that the whole
concept of a present moment is a mathematical hallucination.
Yes. This is the transition to an ontology based on histories before states. Like we discussed
in classical mechanics, the state at time t is everything. But Flyxion points out that in the
real world, in any observational science, really, we never, ever observe a single frozen state in
isolation.
Right.
What we actually observe are trajectories, sequences of events, histories.
The paper uses some brilliant examples outside of physics to prove this. Like think about a
structural engineer diagnosing a bridge collapse.
That's a great one.
If a bridge falls into a river, the engineer isn't trying to magically reconstruct the exact frozen
microscopic state of the concrete at the absolute millisecond it snapped. The failed state is
already sitting right there in the water.
The failure already happened.
Yeah. What they actually reconstruct is the loading history. The sequence of stresses,
the wind shear over hours, the traffic weight over years, that accumulated into the collapse.
Or considered a developmental biologist. They aren't trying to define the exact molecular
state of a single cell frozen in time. They are tracking the lineage history, the trajectory of
cellular divisions and mutations that resulted in the organism.
So the history is what matters.
In every empirical science, the history is the fundamental reality. The current state is just a
theoretical slice we arbitrarily cut out of that continuous history.
Okay. I have to stop you here because I understand the philosophical point, but practically this feels
unnecessarily complicated.
How so?
Well, if I am driving my car down the highway and I look at my speedometer, it says 65 miles
per hour. That is my present state. I know my location. I know my speed.
Okay.
Mathematically, isn't it infinitely simpler to calculate where my car will be in one second
based on that single present state rather than trying to compute my entire driving history from
the moment I left my driveway? Why force an AI to calculate an entire history?
Because that simplicity is a trap. And it's exactly why older simulators fail. What you're
describing is a local step-by-step calculation. Flyxion formalizes why this breaks down in theorem
2.3, the historical simulation theorem.
Okay. Lay it on me.
Let's stick with your car. You look at your speedometer. It says 65 miles per hour straight
ahead. That is your state. But what if half a second ago, your rear left tire hit a
patch of black ice and began a microscopic rotational slip?
Ah, my speedometer wouldn't show that yet.
Exactly. The single snapshot at time T is structurally deficient. It doesn't capture the
global constraints of the complex object moving through time. What happens to your car in the
next second depends entirely on the momentum of that rear tire, the subtle shift in weight
distribution that began earlier in the timeline.
So my present state is actually lying to me about where I'm going.
In a way, yes.
Yeah.
The history dictates the future, not the foes in present.
So a single snapshot can't enforce the rules of reality over time.
Precisely. And the paper focuses heavily on rigidity to prove this point. A rigid object,
like a solid wooden block, is defined by global constraints. Every single point on that block
must maintain the exact same distance from every other point, no matter how violently it spins
or bounces.
Otherwise, it's not a rigid block anymore.
Right. If you use a step-by-step simulator, which only looks at the current frame to guess the next
frame, it struggles to enforce that global rule.
Because it's suffering from a kind of mathematical amnesia. Like, if it only remembers the frame from
one millisecond ago, small rounding errors in the calculation just start to slip in.
Yes. The errors accumulate. Frame by frame, the distance between the points on the wooden block
drifts. After 50 frames, the step-by-step simulator has completely forgotten the original shape of the
block. Oh, wow.
The rigid object literally begins to warp and melt like jelly. This is a notorious problem in
autoregressive simulation. But physiformer doesn't melt because it operates on the entire trajectory
as a single historical object. It doesn't calculate step one, then step two, then step three. It
evaluates the entire timeline simultaneously.
Which honestly sounds computationally impossible. Like you, the listener, picture this. An AI tracking
thousands of points on a wooden block across hundreds of frames of time and analyzing all of it at the
exact same moment.
It sounds overwhelming.
It sounds like it would require a supercomputer the size of a skyscraper to process that much data.
If the AI isn't doing it step-by-step, how does it not just explode from the sheer mathematical load?
That is the core challenge.
And this brings us to what might be the most elegant math in the whole paper,
the admissibility compression principle.
This is where Flicion shows how the AI effectively bypasses the brute force of traditional physics.
It is formalized in theorem 3.5. To understand it, we have to visualize something called the ambient
trajectory space.
Okay, let's visualize it.
Let's say we have our wooden block. It has a number of points. Let's call that n.
And we are tracking it over a number of time steps, called t. And it exists in 3D space.
Okay, so n points over t time in three dimensions.
Right. The ambient space is the set of all possible movements those points could theoretically make.
Multiply 3 times n times t. If you have 100 points over 100 frames, you are looking at a 30,000
dimensional space.
30,000 dimensions? That is insane!
The ambient space represents pure, unconstrained chaos.
No.
It is a space where every single point on your wooden block could just teleport
randomly anywhere in the room in every single frame.
It's the mathematical equivalent of television static, just absolute disconnected randomness.
Exactly. And if the AI had to search through that entire 30,000 dimensional ambient space to find
the one correct path for the bouncing block, it would indeed require a supercomputer the size of
a skyscraper.
Right.
It would be intractable. But here's the brilliant shortcut. The physical world is vastly,
infinitely smaller than the theoretical math allows.
Because physical objects aren't chaotic, they actually obey constraints.
Yes. Because it's a rigid block of wood, thousands of those dimensions are instantly collapsed.
The points can't just teleport. They're bound to each other.
Gravity pulls them down.
Exactly. Gravity pulls them in a specific direction. The solid floor prevents them from passing through
it. These physical constraints carve out a highly specific, drastically smaller subspace
within that massive chaos.
Okay.
Flyxion calls this narrow subspace the admissible manifold. It is the geometric shape of physically
possible histories.
I want to make sure I'm totally tracking this, so let me try an analogy here. Let's think about a freight train.
Okay. A train.
If we are trying to predict where a train is going to be in 10 minutes, the ambient space is the entire 3D
atmosphere of the Earth. It's all the open air that a vehicle could theoretically move through if it
were like an airplane or a spaceship.
Right. Unconstrained movement.
It is massively complex, but the admissible manifold is just the steel train tracks laid on the ground.
That works perfectly. The train tracks represent the physical constraints holding the system
together.
So what the admissibility compression principle is saying is that the AI doesn't need to understand
aerodynamics or jet propulsion or anti-gravity or search the entire atmosphere. It just needs to
recognize the shape of the steel tracks.
Exactly.
And because the tracks, the manifold, are infinitely smaller than the entire sky, learning the shape of
the tracks is actually computationally easier than trying to derive all the complex laws of physics
step by step.
That is the core revelation. Physics is easier to imitate than to derive. If you feed an AI millions of
examples of bouncing objects, it doesn't try to learn Newton's laws. It just maps out the geometry of the
train tracks.
It just sees the pattern.
It learns the shape of coherent histories. The dimension of the admissible manifold is tiny compared to the ambient
space. So the AI just compresses its understanding down to that manifold.
But this raises a massive mechanical question. If the AI has learned the shape of the tracks, how does it
actually get a broken, chaotic prediction onto those tracks?
That's the next step.
Right. Because when an AI like Physiformer starts generating a simulation, it doesn't start with a
perfect block of wood. It starts with absolute garbage. It starts with static.
It starts with pure noise in the ambient space. Yes. And this forces us to completely redefine what a
diffusion model actually is. We hear about diffusion models all the time now. Mid-journey, day L.
Usually for AI art.
Exactly. Usually in the context of generating images.
Yeah.
The common explanation is that they denoise an image. They take a screen of static and step by step,
they remove the static until a picture of a cat emerges.
Right.
But Flyxion argues that denoising or generating is the wrong way to think about what is mathematically
happening. What the diffusion model is actually functioning as is an iterative
repair operator.
So it's not painting a picture. It's fixing something that's broken.
We look at theorem 4.2, diffusion as iterative admissibility projection.
Yeah.
Let's go back to our ambient space. The AI model takes a corrupted, physically impossible history,
a timeline where the wooden block is distorted, its points are scattered, it's violating gravity.
This timeline is sitting way out there in the chaotic ambient space, completely off the tracks.
What the diffusion model does is analyze that broken timeline and step by step, it mathematically
pushes it toward the nearest point on the admissible manifold.
So it physically bends the corrupted timeline until it snaps onto the train tracks of reality.
Exactly. It repairs the impossible physics. And this is where we have to look under the hood at how
it does this, which involves the attention mechanism of the transformer architecture.
Okay. The transformer.
You mentioned earlier the problem of the autoregressive models melting because they forget the shape of
the object. Fisiformer doesn't melt because it uses self-attention across the temporal dimension.
Okay. Stop there. What does self-attention across the temporal dimension actually look like in
practice? Walk me through what the AI is, you know, looking at.
Let's visualize the timeline of our bouncing block as a strip of film, maybe a hundred frames long.
In a traditional step-by-step model, the AI looks at frame five, uses it to draw frame six,
looks at frame six, uses it to draw frame seven.
He's wearing blinders.
Right. But Fisiformer's attention mechanism looks at the entire strip of film simultaneously.
It creates a mathematical query. Let's say a specific corner of the wooden block in frame 45 is
slightly out of place. It has drifted due to noise, causing the block to look stretched.
Because it's corrupted.
Yes. The attention head in frame 45 basically shouts out to the rest of the timeline,
hey, what is the exact distance I am supposed to be from the center of the block?
And the other frame's answer.
Yes. Frame five, which is closer to the clean starting conditions, holds the key to that query.
The attention mechanism compares the stretch distance in frame 45 to the rigid distance established in frame five.
Oh, that's brilliant.
It mathematically recognizes the discrepancy that the violation of historical coherence,
and it applies a repair vector to frame 45, pulling that corner back into place.
It does this for thousands of points across hundreds of frames, millions of times a second.
The future constrains the past. The beginning constrains the end.
The whole timeline iteratively tightens itself until the object is perfectly rigid across all 100 frames.
That is absolutely mind-bending. The future reaching back to constrain the past inside the simulation to ensure the object remains coherent.
It's a completely new way of handling time.
And the paper formalizes this whole repair cycle into something called the sphere pop formulation.
This was a completely new term for me. Can you break down the steps of a sphere pop?
The sphere pop formulation is the mathematical heartbeat of this repair process.
It breaks down into four sequential operations.
First, you pop a witness.
We need to define witness here. It sounds like a legal term, but here it means the initial conditions.
Correct. The witness is, whatever partial information you have at time zero, the starting position, the initial velocity, maybe a boundary of the room, you pop that from the environment.
Step two, you expand the set.
This is where we create the chaos.
Yes. The AI takes that witness and artificially inflates it with massive amounts of noise, generating a wild, corrupted, entirely impossible history.
It throws it out into the chaotic ambient space.
Which feels wrong.
It seems counterproductive, but it's necessary to explore all the mathematical possibilities.
Step three, you refuse inadmissible histories via repair.
This is the diffusion attention mechanism we just talked about.
Exactly. The AI enters the denoising loop.
It looks at the massive, noisy set of possibilities and iteratively pushes it closer and closer to the physical manifold, rejecting the parts of the timeline that violate rigidity or gravity.
It repairs the impossible physics.
It does.
Finally, step four, you collapse the repaired history.
Snap it onto the train tracks.
The timeline reaches the manifold.
It is now physically admissible, coherent, and stable.
That single point on the manifold is your final generated trajectory.
What you perceive as the AI generating a simulation is actually just the byproduct of this relentless repair process collapsing back onto reality.
I want to go back to that word witness, because section five of the paper takes this concept and turns it into a profound philosophical statement about how we perceive time.
It really challenges our assumptions.
Yeah.
The paper explicitly states that initial conditions the witness do not store the future.
They do not.
And this is another sharp break from classical mechanics.
In a Newtonian world, the initial conditions, like the exact position, mass, and velocity of a set of billiard balls, contain the entire future of the billiard table within them.
The future is pre-encoded in the present.
Right.
You just need to run the math to decode it.
I was trying to think of how to visualize this, and I keep coming back to a literal crime scene witness.
Let's hear it.
Imagine a detective is trying to reconstruct a timeline of a robbery.
A witness steps forward and says, I saw a red sedan speeding away facing north at 9.0 p.m.
Now, that witness does not know exactly what happened in the entire city that day.
They don't have the complete state of the crime.
The future path of that red sedan is not stored in their brain.
No, it isn't.
But what their testimony does is give the detective just enough constraints to dramatically narrow down the suspects.
It eliminates any car that went south.
It eliminates any blue cars.
It filters out the noise.
Right.
The witness doesn't contain the truth.
The witness just narrows down the admissible continuations of the timeline.
That analogy cracks perfectly with the mathematics.
The witness provides the boundary conditions for the repair operator.
And to quantify exactly how helpful a witness is, the paper introduces a metric called continuation entropy.
Now, entropy usually means disorder or chaos.
How does it apply here?
Here, it refers to the logarithmic volume of the admissible continuation set.
Let's break that down without the jargon.
It basically asks, given what the witness saw, how many possible futures are still open?
How wide is the pie of possibility?
So, if the situation is highly constrained and predictable, the entropy is low.
Yes.
The paper uses the example of simple, free-flight scenes.
Imagine you toss a baseball through the air.
Once it leaves your hand, assuming we know its basic starting velocity and we know Earth's gravity,
there are very few unobserved parameters that can drastically alter its path before it hits the ground.
It's pretty much a set path.
The wind might shift at a millimeter, but overall, its trajectory is locked.
The continuation entropy is very low.
The volume of possible futures is tiny.
But what if it's a chaotic scene?
Like, what if I take a handful of jagged dice, bouncy balls, and glass marbles,
and I throw them all as hard as I can against an uneven, rocky cave wall?
Then your continuation entropy is massive.
The outcomes are wildly diverse.
A microscopic difference in the contact angle when a bouncy ball hits a rock face
can produce a completely divergent trajectory.
It could go anywhere.
It could bounce left.
It could bounce right.
It could hit a die and scatter.
In this scenario, your initial conditions, the velocity of your throw,
leave a massive number of physically admissible futures open.
The logarithmic volume is huge.
Which kind of begs the question,
if the entropy is massive, how do we trust the AI?
That's a huge problem in the field.
Right. If we ask Fisiformer to simulate that handful of dice,
and it gives us one beautiful, realistic animation of them bouncing,
how do we know if it actually predicted a likely outcome,
or if it just randomly guessed one out of a billion possibilities?
How do we measure its confidence?
We can't use traditional metrics.
Usually, AI engineers use mean squared error, MSE.
They take the AI's prediction, compare it to a real-world video of the event,
and measure the distance between the two.
Makes sense.
But Flyxion points out that MSE is terrible for high-entropy physical systems.
If the AI perfectly predicts a physically valid bounce,
but it bounces left instead of right because of a microscopic variation in the rock,
MSE will say the AI failed completely.
Because it didn't match the exact video.
Right. It penalizes valid alternative futures.
So we need a new ruler entirely.
Exactly.
Flyxion introduces a formal measure called the witness adequacy functional,
represented by the Greek letter lambda.
Instead of measuring against one true ground reality,
lambda measures the geometry of the possibility space itself.
Okay.
It measures the worst-case distance between any admissible continuation
and the specific future the model generated.
Walk me through what lambda looks like in practice.
Like, what do the numbers mean?
If lambda is small, it means the witness tightly constrained the future.
It means that all the possible physical realities look very similar to the one the AI generated.
You can trust the prediction.
Like the baseball.
Exactly.
But if lambda is large, like in your Dyson bouncy ball example,
it tells the engineer, listen, the AI's prediction is perfectly physically valid,
but the witness left so many doors open that this prediction is just one tiny narrow slice
of a massive pie of possibility.
Okay. So it's a confidence score, but for physics.
Right. It gives us a geometric mathematically sound way to measure physical confidence
without relying on the illusion of a single true outcome.
Okay. This all sounds incredibly sophisticated.
The model evaluates the witness, maps the continuation entropy,
and iteratively repairs a corrupted timeline across hundreds of frames using temporal attention
until it snaps onto the physical manifold.
That's a lot of math.
It is. And if I am listening to this, I am thinking, this AI is a genius.
It deeply, fundamentally understands the laws of physics.
Wow.
But then the paper drops an absolute bombshell.
It asks a blunt question.
Does this model actually understand the laws of physics?
And the answer is a resounding categorical no.
It does not understand physics at all.
To understand why, the paper makes a vital, uncompromising distinction
between two concepts that we often blur together, kinematics and mechanics.
Okay.
What physical former and similar diffusion models learn are admissible kinematics, not mechanics.
Okay. You need to draw a hard line between those two for us.
What is the difference?
Mechanics is the causal engine of the universe.
It explains why a trajectory occurs.
It involves forces, mass, inertia, gravity, Newton's laws of motion, the conservation of energy.
The actual invisible rules.
Right.
If you understand mechanics, you understand the underlying invisible rules that govern matter.
Kinematics, on the other hand, merely describes which trajectories occur.
Just the results.
It is the geometry of motion.
It is the shape of the path an object takes, completely devoid of any understanding of the
forces that pushed it along that path.
So it's the difference between knowing how an engine works versus just watching a car drive
by and memorizing the shape of the road it took.
Exactly.
Think of Plato's cave.
The AI is chained in the cave, watching the shadows of physics dance on the wall.
It watches millions of hours of training data.
Right.
It sees two solid blocks of wood approach each other, and it sees them bounce apart.
It learns that blocks don't pass through each other, but it doesn't know why.
It just knows they don't.
It has no concept of electrostatic repulsion between atoms or the concept of solid mass.
It only knows they don't pass through each other because, in all its training data, it
never saw the geometric shape of two boxes clipping through each other.
So it learned the visual shadow that physics casts without ever understanding the object
casting the shadow.
The learned distribution is just empirical kinematics.
Yes.
It is a coordinate shadow model.
Okay, I'm going to play devil's advocate here.
Imagine I'm a video game designer or even an engineer running basic simulations.
If the AI can predict a bouncing block of wood and the visual shadow looks perfectly real
and it never actually violates the rules of reality on screen, does it actually matter
that it's faking the why?
That's a fair question.
If the result is indistinguishable from reality, why do we care if it understands underlying mechanics?
We care deeply.
And the paper explains why, in a section on failure modes as admissibility boundary detection,
the illusion works perfectly until it doesn't.
Where does it break down?
When the AI fails, it doesn't fail gracefully.
It fails precisely at the boundaries of contact.
It hallucinates spurious contacts where objects react before touching, or it allows two objects
to slightly clip through each other for a frame or two.
Why does it fail exactly when they touch?
Because a contact manifold, the exact mathematical moment two rigid objects collide, is a highly
singular mathematically sharp geometric structure.
The rules of motion change discontinuously in a single millisecond.
The smooth geometry shatters.
It gets complicated really fast.
Right.
Because the AI is only looking at the smooth, kinematic shape of motion, it lacks the resolution
to handle that sharp boundary.
When the shadow gets confusing and jagged, it messes up, because it doesn't have the underlying
mechanics to fall back on.
It can't reason its way out.
But no, it can't pause and calculate, wait, object A has 10 kilograms of mass and is moving
at 5 meters per second.
Therefore, the transfer of kinetic energy must be X.
It just guesses the shape of the balance.
Ah, and it also destroys counterfactual reasoning, right?
Like, if it only knows the shadows that is memorized, you can't ask it, what would happen
if I suddenly doubled the gravity halfway through the balance?
Exactly.
It has never seen the shadow of double gravity, so it has no idea how to generate it.
It cannot extrapolate outside its training distribution.
So how do we fix this?
Does the paper offer a way to give the AI actual mechanical understanding?
It does.
In a highly theoretical proposal called the RSVP Theoretic Extension, Flyxion argues that
to achieve true counterfactual reasoning, we have to move beyond just tracking the coordinates
of objects.
We have to teach the AI to learn the underlying causal fields that govern this space.
Okay, what does RSVP stand for?
RSVP stands for the components of this new model.
The core components are a scalar capacity field, a vector transport field, and a constraint
density.
Okay, those are really dense terms.
We cannot let those slide without translating them for the listener.
Let's take them one by one.
If I'm simulating our bouncing block of wood, what is the scalar capacity field?
Think of the scalar capacity field as the invisible potential for interaction in the
space around the object.
It's a field of number scalars that represents how full or empty the space is and how capable
it is of absorbing or resisting force.
So it's basically mapping the environment.
It tells the AI, this region of space is occupied by a dense material and this region is empty air.
Okay, so it gives the AI a sense of density and presence rather than just empty geometric
coordinates.
What about the vector transport field?
The vector transport field is the invisible highway of momentum.
Vectors have direction and magnitude.
When the block of wood hits the floor, the energy doesn't just disappear.
It has to travel.
Energy has to go somewhere.
The vector transport field maps exactly how kinetic energy, momentum, and forces move through
the space and through the objects.
It teaches the AI the flow of causality.
So instead of just seeing the block magically bounce, it sees the actual invisible wave of
energy hit the floor and push the block back up.
And the third one, constraint density.
Constraint density maps how sharply the physical rules apply in a given region.
In open air, the constraint density is low, the block can move freely, but exactly at the
boundary of the solid floor, the constraint density spikes to infinity.
It creates a wall.
It creates a mathematical wall that absolutely forbids penetration.
This is incredible.
If you teach the AI these three fields, capacity, transport, and constraints, you elevate it.
Yes.
You shift the model from being a mere coordinate shadow model to a true field world model.
The physical geometry of the bounce isn't just memorized from training data anymore.
It emerges naturally from the interaction of these causal fields.
It bridges the gap between kinematics and true mechanics.
But until we fully realize that field world model, we are stuck with diffusion models that
occasionally fail at contact boundaries, which brings us to the very practical problem
of how we train them.
If the model fails at sharp physical boundaries, the paper argues we are currently training
them entirely wrong.
We have to stop using Gaussian noise.
Right.
Let's review how standard diffusion models are trained.
You take a clean piece of data, like an image of a dog, and you add Gaussian noise.
You basically sprinkle random television static over the pixels, corrupting the coordinate
space, and you force the AI to reverse the process.
Which works for images.
But Flyxion points out that theorem 7.2 proves this is fundamentally the wrong approach for
physics trajectories.
Why, I mean, static is static, right?
If you want to teach it to repair a timeline, shouldn't you scramble the timeline?
Because Gaussian noise doesn't correspond to any physically meaningful inadmissibility.
In the real world, physics doesn't fail by suddenly turning into random localized static.
That's true.
A wooden block doesn't just have one corner dissolve into a cloud of random coordinates
while the rest stays solid.
If you train the AI to fix static, you are just teaching it advanced image smoothing.
You aren't teaching it the structural rules of reality.
Okay, I have an analogy for this.
Let's say you, the listener, are tasked with training a master mechanic to fix car engines.
Oh, that's good.
The old way, the Gaussian noise way, is taking a hammer, randomly smashing the engine block
into tiny pieces of shrapnel and saying, fix it.
Right, which teaches them nothing.
Exactly.
That doesn't teach the mechanic how a carburetor works or how the timing don't function.
It's just random destruction.
It's an excellent analogy.
So what is the alternative?
Flyxion introduces admissibility structured perturbations.
If we want the AI to learn how to repair broken physics, we must train it by violating specific
physical constraints.
We have to break the simulation in ways that make mathematical sense.
So going back to our mechanic, instead of smashing the engine with a hammer, you intentionally
loosen a specific serpentine belt.
You subtly misalign the timing gears by two degrees.
You drain exactly half the brake fluid.
You give them real problems.
You break the structure of the machine, so the mechanic has to learn the specific structural
repair operators to bring it back to a working state.
Precisely.
In the context of the AI, instead of adding static to the simulation of a rigid block, the
training process artificially bends the mathematical coordinates so the rigid block acts elastic.
Or it introduces a mathematical drift to the velocity vectors so that momentum is suddenly
not conserved across frames.
Or it skips time.
Right.
It introduces random temporal gaps, deleting frames 10 through 15 entirely.
And then you force the AI to look at that bent block or that broken momentum and say,
repair this specific physical violation.
Yes.
This is the essence of the repair equivalence theorem.
Gaussian diffusion repairs coordinate space corruption.
Admissibility structured diffusion repairs specific physical constraint violations.
It's learning the grammar of physics.
Exactly.
If you want the neural network's internal inductive logic to align with physical reality, you
have to perturb it using physical rules.
You have to teach it the grammar of physics by making it correct grammatical errors in motion.
We have been talking a lot about motion.
Histories, trajectories, boundaries, blocks of wood.
But the paper takes a hard left turn here into deep philosophy because we haven't actually
asked what the things moving along these trajectories actually are.
This is where it gets really interesting.
What is an object?
Section 8 is titled Objecthood as Emergent Coherence.
And it makes a claim that frankly forced me to put the paper down and stare at the wall
for a minute.
It asserts that objects do not exist as primitive entities.
It is the most conceptually radical part of the paper.
Human perception is incredibly biased.
When you look around your room, you see things.
You see a chair, a coffee cup, a laptop.
Or objects.
You assume these objects are fundamental, primitive building blocks of reality.
They exist first and then they move.
But Flyxion argues, via Proposition 8.2, Historical Coherence, that objecthood is not a property
of a thing.
It is an emergent pattern.
It is a relational property of a history.
Okay, you're going to have to translate that formula.
Let's take a rigid body, like the chair.
If the chair isn't a thing, what is it?
Mathematically, to the AI, what is a rigid chair?
It is not an entity with a labeled chair attached to it.
It is simply a cluster of points, vertices, and space.
Just a cloud of points.
If you track those points over time and you observe that point A maintains the exact same
distance from point B and point B maintains the exact same distance from point C, regardless
of how the whole cluster moves.
That unbroken mathematical relationship is called historical coherence.
So the AI doesn't see a chair?
No.
It sees a historically coherent trajectory of points.
The coherence is the object.
The objecthood is constituted by the rigidity of its trajectory.
So the paper is saying the object doesn't exist first and then decide to obey rigidity.
The mathematical pattern of rigidity exists, and our human brains slap a label on that persistent
pattern and call it an object.
Exactly.
Objecthood is an emergent property of admissibility.
And this isn't just philosophical navel-gazing.
This fundamental shift explains one of the most astonishing empirical real-world results of
the physiformer model.
Right.
The training data versus the test data.
Tell them about the Stanford bunny.
When the researchers trained physiformer, they wanted to test its ability to generalize.
So they restricted its training data purely to simple, convex, geometric primitives.
Cubes, basic blocks, cylinders.
Really simple stuff.
The most complex object it ever saw during its training had 88 vertices.
It was never shown anything complex.
But after training was complete, they gave it a test.
They asked it to simulate the physics of a highly complex 3D mesh of a fish, a detailed
teapot, and the Stanford bunny, a famous 3D test model that has hundreds and hundreds
of vertices.
Now, if you take a standard visual AI, an AI trained to recognize images of cubes, and
you show it a picture of a bunny, it fails completely.
It says, I don't know what that is, that's not a cube.
But physiformer succeeded flawlessly.
It simulated the bunny bouncing, tumbling, and colliding perfectly without a single moment
of retraining.
Wait, really?
How is that possible?
How does an AI trained on 88-point cubes know how to animate a 500-point bunny?
Because, returning to Proposition 8.2, physiformer isn't looking in the shape.
It doesn't see a bunny, and it never saw a cube.
It only sees a massive cluster of points.
And it looks for the coherence.
Yes, and it realizes, ah, this new cluster of points is obeying the exact same historical
coherence relation as the points I trained on.
The relative distances are constant.
A cube is not a bunny visually, but to the AI, their rigidity is exactly the same mathematical
language.
The AI learned a coherence detector.
As long as the hundreds of vertices of the bunny maintain constant relative distance over
time, the AI just projects that entirely novel shape onto the admissible manifold and
treats it exactly like a cube.
It forces us to realize how differently AI perceives reality compared to humans.
We are blinded by geometry and semantic labels.
The AI is blind to shape, but possesses superhuman vision for coherence structure.
That is wild!
It looks past the skin of the object and reads the invariant mathematical skeleton underneath.
Generalization in this new paradigm isn't about recognizing a new object.
It is about recognizing the underlying coherent structure across wild geometric variations.
The universe is just a massive swirling storm of points, and the ones that happen to dance
together in a predictable pattern we call objects.
That is staggering.
It is a profound abstraction.
And the beauty of this level of abstraction is that it scales.
Which brings us to the final major concept of the paper.
We need to zoom all the way out.
Because Flyxion argues that this entire framework repairing broken trajectories onto an admissible
manifold based on historical coherence doesn't just apply to rigid teapods and cubes.
It's bigger than that.
This mathematics is the blueprint for all world models.
We hear the term world model thrown around a lot in Silicon Valley right now, usually meaning
like an AI that can guess what happens next in a video.
But Flyxion tightens this definition significantly.
A world model is not just a video predictor, it is an admissibility engine.
Exactly.
Its job is not to play out a single deterministic tape.
Its fundamental function is to construct admissible continuations of present states, strictly
constrained by the rules of whatever domain it is operating in.
So if the domain is a physics simulation, the constraints are the things we've been
talking about.
Rigidity, momentum, collision geometry.
But this math maps perfectly onto domains that have nothing to do with physics.
It maps onto large language models.
It does.
An LLM, like the one powering a chatbot, is fundamentally an admissibility engine for the
domain of natural language.
Think about the process.
The prompt you type in, write a poem about a robot, is the witness.
It is the partial initial condition.
And the LLM doesn't have a single deterministic pre-written poem waiting for it.
It isn't pulling the one true future text out of a database.
No.
The LLM samples from a massive manifold of admissible continuations.
It explores the continuation entropy.
It constructs a sequence of words that are constrained by the rules of grammar, the rules
of semantics, and the contextual boundaries of your prompt.
It repairs the blank space.
It repairs the blank space into a coherent history of language.
This exact same admissibility, math, applies to economic modeling, predicting how markets
will react to a supply shock.
It applies to robot planning, mapping out how to navigate a crowded room.
Any domain where the future is constrained by rules can be modeled as an admissibility engine.
To visualize how an admissibility engine navigates the future, the paper introduces one final
mathematical concept, the optionality field, represented by the symbol omega.
What is the optionality field measuring?
Currently, models output a trajectory.
But Flyxion argues a true-world model shouldn't just output a path.
It should output a map of how open the future is at any given coordinate in space and time.
Like a heat map of possibility.
The optionality field measures how many admissible futures remain available.
It's a topographic map of possibility.
Okay, let me try to visualize this topographic map.
Let's go back to our free-flight baseball.
I throw the ball.
While it's arguing through the empty air, its trajectory is locked by gravity.
So the optionality field surrounding the ball is very tight, very small.
The future is constrained.
Right.
The future is a narrow, flat plane.
There aren't many branching paths.
Correct.
The constraints are dominating.
But now, imagine a different scenario.
Imagine two rigid bodies hurtling toward each other.
Two meteorites in the vacuum of space.
Or two cars skidding through a rainy intersection.
And they narrowly miss each other.
They pass within a fraction of a millimeter, but they don't touch.
And near-miss.
Right.
At the exact mathematical moment of that near-miss, what happens to the optionality field?
It spikes massively.
It erupts into a mountain on our topographic map.
Why does it spike?
Because the post-near-miss trajectories are suddenly hypersensitive to microscopic, unobserved
parameters.
If those cars or meteorites had touched even slightly, if a single molecule of paint had
scraped the resulting spin, the deflection, the massive transfer of kinetic energy, would
have shattered the timeline into a wildly different future.
The smallest change in the witness would create a completely divergent reality.
Exactly.
So right at the point of the near-miss, the universe of possibility balloons outward.
The future is suddenly wide open, highly uncertain, full of chaotic, branching paths.
And then, a millisecond later, once they pass each other safely and separate, the field
collapses again.
Back to normal.
The mountain flattens back out into a predictable, constrained trajectory.
The universe was suddenly violently wide open, and then collapsed back into a single, quiet
line.
I want to connect this back to you, the listener.
Think about your own life in terms of this optionality field.
Think about the moment where your personal field spiked.
We've all had them.
Maybe it was a literal near-miss.
A time you were driving, someone swerved.
Time seemed to slow to a crawl.
And a thousand different tragic futures flashed before your eyes before you safely pulled
the wheel.
In that fraction of a second, your optionality field erupted.
The universe of admissible futures was terrifyingly vast.
And then it passed.
Or maybe it wasn't physical.
Maybe it was a split-second decision.
Standing in an airport, choosing whether to say yes to a job offer in a new city or stay
home.
In that moment of decision, your optionality field spiked massively.
A whole multiverse of branching, completely coherent, admissible lives opened up before
you.
And then you chose.
And the moment you made the choice, the moment you bought the ticket, the field collapsed
back down, and you were locked onto a single trajectory again.
It is a profoundly human way to interpret the mathematics of trajectory prediction.
What Flyxion is ultimately arguing is that successful prediction, whether for a bouncing
block, a language model, or perhaps even a mind, is not the computation of a unique, destined
truth from perfect specifications.
It's about dealing with the mess.
It is the construction of admissible continuations from messy, incomplete witnesses, coupled with
a deep understanding of how tightly those witnesses constrain the chaos of the future.
The goal is to report not just what will happen, but how constrained the future has become.
Okay, let's take a deep breath and recap the massive intellectual genie we just went
on.
We started by killing Laplace's demon.
We dismantled the myth of the complete state, realizing that we never have perfect information
and that the gap in our knowledge isn't a blurry error.
It is the map of physical possibility.
From there, we shifted our entire ontology of time.
We moved from frozen snapshots to histories before states, recognizing that the continuous
trajectory is the fundamental unit of reality.
Which changed how we compute everything.
This allowed us to understand the admissibility compression principle, why AI can bypass impossible
30,000 dimensional calculations, by simply learning the narrow geometric tracks of physically
valid histories.
And we fundamentally redefined diffusion models.
They aren't generating images from static.
They are iterative repair operators.
They use temporal attention to pull the future and the past together, bending noisy, impossible
timelines until they snap onto the manifold of reality.
A completely new view of generation.
We learned that our starting conditions are just witnesses, barely narrowing down the suspects
of the future, measured by continuation entropy and the lambda functional.
We face the uncomfortable truth that current AI models are trapped in Plato's cave, learning
the kinematic shadows of motion rather than the causal mechanics of forces, requiring theoretical
extensions like the RSVP field's capacity, transport, and constraints to truly understand the world.
And we learned that to teach them we must break them structurally, abandoning Gaussian noise for
admissibility-structured perturbations.
And we shattered our perception of reality with the idea that objects themselves do not exist as
primitive entities. They are emergent patterns of historical coherence. A rigid bunny and a rigid
cube speak the exact same mathematical language to an AI.
All of this culminating in the grand vision of world models as admissibility engines, navigating the
sudden spikes and collapses of the optionality field of our universe.
It is a dense, elegant, and structurally radical framework. It proves mathematically that our
physical worlds are massively over-constrained and that prediction only works because coherent
histories can be repaired from the fragments of partial witnesses.
Which brings us to a final provocative thought for you to carry with you. We open this deep dive
talking about the desire for clear, binary, perfect prediction in a messy world.
Flyxion's paper shows us that artificial intelligence is mastering this world not by
demanding perfect information, but by accepting the mess and iteratively repairing broken histories
based on the underlying coherence of the universe.
That's the key takeaway.
But if physical worlds are just persistent, histories repaired from partial witnesses turn that lens inward.
Look at how your own human memory works. Look at human consciousness itself.
When you sit down and try to remember your past, or when you close your eyes and try to predict your
tomorrow, are you accessing a perfect, complete state of your brain?
You definitely aren't.
Do you have perfect, frictionless information about your own life? Of course not. Your memories are fragmented.
Your perception of the present is incredibly biased and incomplete. Perhaps your own brain is just a
biological admissibility engine.
That is a terrifying and beautiful thought. Perhaps your mind is constantly doing iterative
repair on the messy, noisy, partial witness of your senses. You take your incomplete memories,
your fragmented desires, and your brain iteratively bends them, rejecting the impossible,
until it projects you forward onto a coherent manifold of reality. You aren't calculating your
destined future step by step. You are constantly, every second of every day, repairing your timeline
into an admissible continuation. Think about that the next time you try to predict your own future.
...